Describe integration with MLflow (#3856)
kedro-org/kedro: docs/source/integrations/mlflow.md

For example, you can log metrics, parameters, and artifacts from your Kedro pipeline runs to MLflow, then compare and reproduce the results. When collaborating with others on a Kedro project, MLflow's model registry and deployment tools make it easy to share and deploy machine learning models.

## Prerequisites

You will need the following:

- A working Kedro project in a virtual environment. The examples in this document assume the `spaceflights-pandas-viz` starter.
- The MLflow client installed into the same virtual environment: `pip install mlflow`.

We recommend use of an [MLflow tracking server](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/tracking/server.html), that enables you to inspect runs through a web interface. This is optional, but strongly recommended, even if you're working locally on a solo project. This documentation assumes that you have a tracking server, whether it's a local one run by yourself or a remote one running on another machine or provided by a cloud vendor.
You will need to configure your client properly,
either by setting the `MLFLOW_TRACKING_URI` environment variable

> or by using the {external+mlflow:py:func}`mlflow.set_tracking_uri` function.

Reviewer: Yes, I think this is very confusing for users. Actually it is not mandatory to have a tracking server to be able to use the UI, and I think the entire documentation examples should work without one. It is obviously very recommended to have one for many reasons (persistence, collaboration, granular access, separate storage of heavy components from metadata...), but it's like saying "don't use local csv files to store your data but use a database instead" : beginners won't see the immediate need and it's not a big deal for the first use I guess.

> or by using the {external+mlflow:py:func}`mlflow.set_tracking_uri` function.

Author: You're both completely right, this stems from some misunderstanding I had (I confess my first experience with MLflow was kinda bumpy). I will simplify all this, agreed with @Galileo-Galilei that it's not really needed to introduce this complexity early on.

> or by using the {external+mlflow:py:func}`mlflow.set_tracking_uri` function.

Author: Addressing this in the upcoming version.

Read {external+mlflow:doc}`the official MLflow tracking server 5 minute overview <getting-started/tracking-server-overview/index>`
for a list of available options,
and {external+mlflow:ref}`the MLflow tracking server documentation <logging_to_a_tracking_server>`
for detailed configuration instructions.

## Use cases

There are different use cases for which you might want to use MLflow,
some of which are already covered by the [`kedro-mlflow`](https://kedro-mlflow.readthedocs.io/) plugin.
This page explains how to implement them yourself in a simplified form,
and also how `kedro-mlflow` can do the hard work for you.

### Simple tracking of Kedro runs in MLflow using Hooks

Although MLflow works best when working with machine learning (ML) and AI pipelines,
you can track your regular Kedro runs as experiments in MLflow even if they do not use ML.

One possible way of doing it is using the {py:meth}`~kedro.framework.hooks.specs.PipelineSpecs.before_pipeline_run` Hook
to log the `run_params` passed to the Hook.

> An implementation would look as follows:

Author: Wanted to avoid adding too much prose here but at least a link to the Kedro Hooks intro would indeed be useful here, will add.

> An implementation would look as follows:

Author: Addressed.

```python
import typing as t

import mlflow
from kedro.framework.hooks import hook_impl
from mlflow.entities import RunStatus

> 

Author: Good catch, will add

> 

Author: Addressing in the upcoming version

...
```

If you open your tracking server UI you will observe a result like this:

```{image} ../meta/images/simple-mlflow-tracking1.png
:alt: Simple MLflow tracking
:width: 50%
:align: center
```

```{image} ../meta/images/simple-mlflow-tracking2.png
:alt: Simple MLflow tracking
:width: 50%
:align: center
```

Notice that these "parameters" do not include the Kedro parameters as defined in `parameters*.yml`.
To log the actual Kedro parameters, you can continue writing a custom Hook
or use the `kedro-mlflow` plugin instead, as described in the following section.

### Complete tracking of Kedro runs in MLflow using `kedro-mlflow`

You could make the code snippet above more complex, but you are likely to reach a point where it is easier to take advantage of the work that the `kedro-mlflow` plugin can do for you.

To start using `kedro-mlflow`, the only required step is to install it:

```
pip install kedro-mlflow
```

In recent versions of Kedro, this will already register the `kedro-mlflow` Hooks for you.

:::{note}
If you implemented your custom `MLflowHooks` as described in the previous section,
consider disabling them to avoid logging the runs twice.

> :::

Reviewer: I think this is confusing for beginners and the warning should be at the beginning of the section. If one's read the section from linearly top to bottom (which is what you usually do 😄) I think it is very confusing to understand that this section suggests to *replace* the custom hook with ``kedro-mlflow`` and not add it.  Eventually as a beginner I would likely wonder "why the hell did I start to do something that is suggested t be removed in the following section? 

I think an (advanced) example that would be much nicer could be an example of a *combination* of ``kedro-mlflow`` and a custom hook (which will for exemple track something custom that ``kedro-mlflow`` does not, e.g. the commit sha ?), but still benefit from kedro-mlflow configuration management because kedro-mlflow hook will run first.

`kedro-mlflow` will use a subset of the `run_params` as tags for the MLflow run,
and log the Kedro parameters as MLflow parameters:

```{image} ../meta/images/complete-mlflow-tracking-kedro-mlflow.png
:alt: Complete MLflow tracking with kedro-mlflow
:width: 50%
:align: center
```

Check out {external+kedro-mlflow:doc}`the official kedro-mlflow tutorial <source/03_getting_started/02_first_steps>`
for more detailed steps.

Notice that `kedro-mlflow` assumes 1 Kedro project = 1 MLflow experiment.
If this does not suit your use case, consider pursuing a more customised approach

> like the one described in the previous section.

Reviewer: Actually this is the default but it is fully customisable in the ``mlflow.yml``, so I won't call it an assumption (you can even use a custom resolver to create something very custom and dynamic in the mlflow.yml if you want)

Author: Very true. I'll reword this section.

Author: Addressing in the upcoming version.

For example, you can use the {py:meth}`~kedro.framework.hooks.specs.DatasetSpecs.before_dataset_saved` Hook
to store a pickled version of the data, as follows:

```python
import pickle
import tempfile
import typing as t
from pathlib import Path

class ArtifactTrackingHooks:
    @hook_impl
    def before_dataset_saved(self, dataset_name: str, data: t.Any):
        logger.info(f"Logging dataset '{dataset_name}' to MLFlow")

        # Serialise object to temporary directory and log it to MLFlow
        with tempfile.TemporaryDirectory() as temp_dir:
            file_path = Path(temp_dir) / f"{dataset_name}.pkl"
            try:
                with open(file_path, "wb") as fh:
                    pickle.dump(data, fh)
            except Exception:
                logger.error(f"Failed to pickle dataset '{dataset_name}'")
            else:
                mlflow.log_artifact(file_path)
```

Resulting in something like this:

```{image} ../meta/images/mlflow-pickle-artifact.png
:alt: Tracking artifacts as pickles in MLflow
:width: 50%
:align: center
```

Notice though that storing artifacts as Python pickles

> prevents you from fully using MLflow native preview capabilities.

Reviewer: Is it really necessary to specify it? Just a nitpick, but maybe it would be nicer to write it the other way around with a csv or a png example which would render with a nice preview and say that mlflow offers a preview for some data format?

> # Using Kedro and MLflow

Reviewer 2: I am making edits on the file and will commit to the branch, but where I have queries I'll leave them in the text here. You know what I'm gonna say about this title, right?

Apart from being a gerund, how are we using MLflow? Could this be more usefully "How to track Kedro pipelines with MLflow"? Or "How to add MLflow to your Kedro workflow" or something? Seems like it'd be a lot more useful in a SERP.

Author: Hah sorry, I have a fixation with gerunds.

"Track Kedro pipelines" sounds a bit ambiguous, "how to add MLflow" is fine. Other ideas: "How to combine Kedro with MLflow", "How to build an MLOps stack with Kedro and MLflow", "How to do experiment tracking and model registry in your Kedro project with MLflow"

MLflow is an open-source platform for managing the end-to-end machine learning lifecycle.
It provides tools for tracking experiments, packaging code into reproducible runs, and sharing and deploying models.
MLflow also supports multiple machine learning frameworks, including TensorFlow, PyTorch, and scikit-learn.

MLflow is an excellent companion for your Kedro projects because it allows you to easily track and manage your machine learning experiments and models.
By integrating MLflow with Kedro, you can seamlessly log metrics, parameters, and artifacts from your Kedro pipeline runs to MLflow,
making it easy to compare and reproduce results.
Additionally, MLflow's model registry and deployment tools make it easy to share and deploy your Kedro models with others.

## Preparation

You will need

- A working Kedro project.

> - The MLflow client properly installed in your project: `pip install mlflow`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The MLflow client properly installed in your virtual environment: `pip install mlflow`.
```

Reviewer 2: How would you install into a project? Should this read virtual environment instead?

Author: Oops, absolutely yes 👍🏼

> - (Recommended) An MLflow Tracking Server, which will allow you to quickly inspect the runs with a user-friendly web interface.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention how to start a basic one with `mlflow ui` etc?

Author: Should be short and wouldn't harm I'd say, good suggestion.

Author: Addressing this in the upcoming version.

For example, if you have a dataset corresponding to a scikit-learn model,
you can modify it as follows:

```diff
 regressor:
-  type: pickle.PickleDataset
-  filepath: data/06_models/regressor.pickle
-  versioned: true
+  type: kedro_mlflow.io.models.MlflowModelTrackingDataset
+  flavor: mlflow.sklearn
```

The `kedro-mlflow` hook will log the model as part of the run
in {external+mlflow:doc}`the standard MLflow Model format <models>`.

If, additionally, you want to _register_ it
(hence store it in the MLflow Model Registry)
you can add a `registered_model_name` parameter:

```{code-block} yaml
:emphasize-lines: 4-5

regressor:
  type: kedro_mlflow.io.models.MlflowModelTrackingDataset
  flavor: mlflow.sklearn
  save_args:
    registered_model_name: spaceflights-regressor
```

Then you will see it listed as a Registered Model:

```{image} ../meta/images/kedro-mlflow-registered-model.png
:alt: MLflow Model Registry listing one model registered with kedro-mlflow
:width: 80%
:align: center
```

:::{warning}
At the moment it's not straightforward to specify the `run_id`
to use a specific version of a model for inference within a Kedro pipeline,

> see discussion on [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/Galileo-Galilei/kedro-mlflow/issues/549).

Reviewer: I see people doing  it in production for *a lot* of models, so it is definitely possible ;) I really need to see the code you run to get that error, but essentially you cannot *save* a model in an existing run, because you would alterate it and this is definitely not the purpose of experiment tracking. However, there is absolutely no problem to *load* a model in an existing mlflow run (say the sapecflights regressor you've just trained) to run a kedro pipeline which will log in another mlflow run, or can just be used without logging in mlflow.

> see discussion on [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/Galileo-Galilei/kedro-mlflow/issues/549).

Author: > essentially you cannot save a model in an existing run, because you would alterate it and this is definitely not the purpose of experiment tracking

That makes a lot of sense. Still chewing on your explanation, will rewrite this part.

> see discussion on [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/Galileo-Galilei/kedro-mlflow/issues/549).

Author: Addressing this in the upcoming version.

# How to add MLflow to your Kedro workflow

> MLflow is an open-source platform for managing the end-to-end machine learning lifecycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[MLflow](https://mlflow.org/) is an open-source platform for managing the end-to-end machine learning lifecycle.
```

It provides tools for tracking experiments, packaging code into reproducible runs, and sharing and deploying models.
MLflow supports machine learning frameworks such as TensorFlow, PyTorch, and scikit-learn.

Adding MLflow to a Kedro project enables you to track and manage your machine learning experiments and models.

> For example, you can log metrics, parameters, and artifacts from your Kedro pipeline runs to MLflow, then compare and reproduce the results. When collaborating with others on a Kedro project, MLflow's model registry and deployment tools make it easy to share and deploy machine learning models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, you can log metrics, parameters, and artifacts from your Kedro pipeline runs to MLflow, then compare and reproduce the results. When collaborating with others on a Kedro project, MLflow's model registry and deployment tools help you to share and deploy machine learning models.
```

## Prerequisites

You will need the following:

> - A working Kedro project in a virtual environment. The examples in this document assume the `spaceflights-pandas-viz` starter.

Reviewer 4: I believe the link https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/tutorial/spaceflights_tutorial.html will be beneficial here because it seems you assumed that the user needs to be fully familiar with how Kedro works for the spaceflights example before following that manual.

```

If you open your tracking server UI you will observe a result like this:

```{image} ../meta/images/complete-mlflow-tracking-kedro-mlflow.png
:alt: Complete MLflow tracking with kedro-mlflow
:width: 80%
:align: center
```

Notice that `kedro-mlflow` used a subset of the `run_params` as tags for the MLflow run,
and logged the Kedro parameters as MLflow parameters.

Check out {external+kedro-mlflow:doc}`the official kedro-mlflow tutorial <source/03_getting_started/02_first_steps>`
for more detailed steps.

### Artifact tracking in MLflow using `kedro-mlflow`

`kedro-mlflow` provides some out-of-the-box artifact tracking capabilities
that connect your Kedro project with your MLflow deployment, such as `MlflowArtifactDataset`,
which can be used to wrap any of your existing Kedro datasets.

Use of this dataset has the advantage that the preview capabilities of the MLflow UI can be used.

:::{warning}
This will work for datasets that are outputs of a node,
and will have no effect for datasets that are free inputs (hence are only loaded).
:::

For example, if you modify the a `matplotlib.MatplotlibWriter` dataset like this:

```diff

>  dummy_confusion_matrix:

Reviewer 4: While experienced users might find it obvious that you need to modify `catalog.yml` here, it may not be as clear to new users. Therefore, I suggest adding a comment here and next examples, similar to the one you included below, such as:
`# conf/base/catalog.yml`

Author: Good catch!

For example, you can log metrics, parameters, and artifacts from your Kedro pipeline runs to MLflow, then compare and reproduce the results. When collaborating with others on a Kedro project, MLflow's model registry and deployment tools help you to share and deploy machine learning models.

## Prerequisites

You will need the following:

- A working Kedro project in a virtual environment. The examples in this document assume the `spaceflights-pandas-viz` starter.
  If you're unfamiliar with the Spaceflights project, check out [our tutorial](/tutorial/spaceflights_tutorial).
- The MLflow client installed into the same virtual environment. For the purposes of this tutorial,
  you can use MLflow {external+mlflow:doc}`in its simplest configuration <tracking>`.

To set yourself up, create a new Kedro project:

```
$ kedro new --starter=spaceflights-pandas-viz --name spaceflights-mlflow
$ cd spaceflights-mlflow
$ python -m venv && source .venv/bin/activate
(.venv) $ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

And then launch the UI locally from the root of your directory as follows:

```
(.venv) $ pip install mlflow

> (.venv) $ mlflow ui --backend-store-uri ./mlflow_runs

Author: Why not leaving the default location? Well, because it's called `mlruns`, which could be conflated with https://github.com/mlrun/mlrun 😬 This requires us to write a `mlflow.yml` in the first step, but I think it's not the end of the world

```{code-block} yaml
:emphasize-lines: 4-5

regressor:
  type: kedro_mlflow.io.models.MlflowModelTrackingDataset
  flavor: mlflow.sklearn
  save_args:
    registered_model_name: spaceflights-regressor
```

Then you will see it listed as a Registered Model:

```{image} ../meta/images/kedro-mlflow-registered-model.png
:alt: MLflow Model Registry listing one model registered with kedro-mlflow
:width: 80%
:align: center
```

To load a model from a specific run, you can specify the `run_id`.
For that, you can make use of {ref}`runtime parameters <runtime-params>`:

```{code-block} yaml
:emphasize-lines: 13

# Add the intermediate datasets to run only the inference
X_test:
  type: pandas.ParquetDataset
  filepath: data/05_model_input/X_test.pq

y_test:
  type: pandas.CSVDataset  # https://github.com/pandas-dev/pandas/issues/54638
  filepath: data/05_model_input/y_test.csv

regressor:
  type: kedro_mlflow.io.models.MlflowModelTrackingDataset
  flavor: mlflow.sklearn
  run_id: ${runtime_params:mlflow_run_id,null}
  save_args:
    registered_model_name: spaceflights-regressor
```

And specify the MLflow run id on the command line as follows:

```
$ kedro run --to-outputs=X_test,y_test
...

> $ kedro run --from-nodes=evaluate_model_node --params mlflow_run_id=4cba84...

Author: This was somewhat clunky, dumped some thoughts in https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/discussions/3922

Reviewer 4: I agree, but it's great that you added that section! It's an interesting functionality.
